Adds rules API proposal (#419)
observatorium/observatorium: docs/proposals/20201019-prometheus-rules-in-observatorium-api.md

* The Observatorium API must be able to scale horizontally scale with the number of users.

## Non-Goals

* Rate-limiting or accounting of user resources.
* Define or implement the underlying storage technology.

## How

We propose to solve the above problem by implementing a multi-tenant API that allows users to create, read, update and delete Prometheus alerting and recording rules.

Thanos Ruler operates on the rule configuration provided by users, which is consumed from a file defined by Ruler's `--rule.file` flag. Therefore, this configuration that we ingest via the API needs to be replicated into the local data directory of the Thanos Ruler instances. This is achieved with the [thanos-ruler-syncer](https://github.com/observatorium/thanos-rule-syncer), an application that will call the API above and write the results into a location that Thanos Rule can access.

### How should we persist user's rule configuration?

For the Observatorium API to satisfy our requirement of scaling horizontally with the number of user requests, we need to use a persistent storage layer for our user's recording rules.

TODO

> * Object storage is already used in Thanos. Users will already have this infrastructure provisioned.

Author: @squat I'll need a hand in filling out these sections - happy to do either over meet or happy for you to fill this in async

### How will users perform authentication and authorization?

TODO
* Probably the same way that Telemeter client and server authentication works?

> * How will users provision new API keys / secret material?

Author: ditto as above

Author: Answer - we will just use the same RBAC mechanism as we do already.

## Implement API for managing Prometheus Recording Rules

* **Owners:**:
  * `@squat` / `@ianbillett`

* **Related Tickets:**
  * `<JIRA, GH Issues>`

* **Other docs:**
  * Original [Prometheus Rules in Observatorium API design doc](https://docs.google.com/document/d/1F9Cw6I4qFs__0Dcm19xvxJqRBCAGQBBggYg_PQSV_-g/edit#heading=h.cp0jmcyfj3) (internal Red Hat link)

## TL;DR

> We propose implementing a multi-tenant API that allows users to create, read, update and delete Prometheus recording rules.

Reviewer: https://github.com/observatorium/observatorium/pull/419/files#diff-8de1f9b976bdab7fdd01a236d8fed2c2be98ee58ea965d33567ba147fe07479eR45 mentions both `alerting` and `recording` rules. But the title and here only mentions `recording` rules, so is `alerting` rule also included in the proposal?

Author: Great question @yeya24 :raised_hands:

The original design doc included both alerting and recording rules in scope. That makes sense given that recording and alerting rules can be freely mixed in a given `rule_files`. 

However, without a corresponding set of features to support user-supplied alertmanager routing configuration instances (which is definitely out of scope of this document) - any alerting rules we ingest will sit idle.

My preference here is to scope this design doc to recording rules only, and explicitly reject any rule files that contain `alert:` keys with an appropriately clear error message to the caller.

Author: I've added this to the non-goals section. Resolving.

#### Implicit deploy cycle dependency

Currently, the only method of modifying Prometheus recording rules in Observatorium is via the jsonnet definition in our repository. This implicitly ties an update of the rule configuration to a rollout of the service. This implicitly ties the deploy-cycle of Prometheus rules to the deploy-cycle of Observatorium itself. If a new set of rules needs to be deployed, our team is required to roll-out our production infrastructure.

As the number of tenants we support and tenants we serve increases, the team responsible for the Observatorium installation is required to roll out production more frequently in order to satisfy tenant requests. This becomes an increasing impediment to tenant experience as the size of Observatorium increases.

#### Shared configuration repositories

For rules to be rolled out, tenants need the ability to raise pull requests against the Observatorium repositories that contain our source configuration. This works fine when the two teams co-exist within the same organisation, but it becomes a blocking issue when the two teams share a much more restricted (e.g. inter-company) trust boundary.

> This is not a blocker for Red Hat's internal offering, however this is not inline with Observatorium's stated goal (TODO: insert link) of offering a SaaS-like monitoring solution.

Reviewer 2: What link should be here?

## Goals

* Tenants can update their Prometheus recording rules without intervention from the operating team.

> * Observatorium must be able to scale horizontally scale with the number of tenants.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* Observatorium must be able to scale horizontally with the number of tenants.
```

Author: added in file

This leads to two problems we need to solve:
1. How does `Rule` obtain tenant recording rules?
2. How do we store tenant recording rules?

### How does Rule get tenant recording rules

For this step, we will leverage the [thanos-ruler-syncer](https://github.com/observatorium/thanos-rule-syncer).

Periodically, this application does three things:
1. Calls the Observatorium API to retrieve tenant recording rules.
2. Writes these rules to a location defined by the `-file` flag.
3. Asks Rule to reload its rules by calling the `/-/reload` endpoint.

This will run as a sidecar to `Rule` and `-file` will be shared between the two containers.

### How do we store tenant rules

#### Service

We will implement the rule storage backend as a separate service within Observatorium (i.e. not part of the API). This follows the established pattern of specifying backends in the API configuration and also maintains desirable properties of the API:

> * The API stays as a super-performant gateway that handles authentication and authorization but no application-specific logic.

Reviewer 2: Optionally we could mention the 'do one thing and do it well' principle (from UNIX philosophy), which I think this design is a great example of.

Author: Yes nice touch - will add that too :)

* Observatorium users are free to specify different storage backends, or no rule backend at all.

The rule backend will be specified via the `--metrics.rules.endpoint` flag, and will route requests via the `/api/metrics/v1/{tenant}/rules` endpoint.

NB: By scoping rules to the `/metrics` endpoint we are consciously creating room for future logging rules.

> Since we have explicitly de-scoped alerting rules from this proposal, the service will need to inspect the rules payload. If any rules are found to contain an `alert` field, this request should be rejected and the user returned a `400 Bad Request` error with a helpful message.

Reviewer 2: I was wondering about this already, good job on answering questions before they can be asked :+1:. However, as an alternative, I was thinking whether accepting the mixed 'content' and giving the user warning about ignoring `alert`s would be more user-friendly. I guess it comes down whether we 'value' more user's convenience or user's level of awareness about what we are accepting (warning might as well be overlooked). I'm wondering about others' opinions.

Author: Hmm that is a very astute point :thinking: I'll add a section that dives into this decision in more detail and we can discuss there.

Ideally, we would define the rule storage backend API in OpenAPI format, so that it can easily be consumed by downstream services.

#### Storage layer

> We will use a persistent storage mechanism that is external to the api deployment (i.e. no local storage). This enables us to satisfy our requirement of horizontally scaling the rule storage backend.

Reviewer 2: nit: capitalizing API everywhere
```suggestion
We will use a persistent storage mechanism that is external to the API deployment (i.e. no local storage). This enables us to satisfy our requirement of horizontally scaling the rule storage backend.
```

Author: updated in doc

We discussed that we will be likely to employ a RDBMS relatively soon for other features (i.e. RBAC), but we decided to cross that bridge when we came to it.

### Sequence Diagram

How will this all work in practice?

![sequence-diagram](../assets/recording-rules-api.svg)

#### 1. Store Tenant Rules
1. Tenant sends request to the API using the path `/api/metrics/v1/{tenant}/rules` containing their rules data.
2. API performs authentication and authorization of the tenant then forwards the request to the rules storage backend.
3. Rules storage backend performs validation of the payload, rejecting any requests found to contain `alert` rules, then stores the rule file in object storage at the path `metrics/rules/{tenant}/{file_name}.yaml`.
4. Object storage returns success to the Rule Backend.
5. Rule backend returns success to the API.
6. API returns success to the Tenant.

#### 2. Sync Rules to Rule
1. Periodically, thanos-ruler-syncer queries the API for all rules for all tenants.
   * Do we need to expose an endpoint to return all of the rules? Unclear at the moment.

>    * NB: We can definitely make some optimisations here. Suggestions welcome.

Reviewer 3: Why does the `thanos-ruler-syncer` require to poll the API to fetch all rules? Why not polling the `ruler-storage-backend`?

Requiring to poll the API for internal traffic looks like complicating the case w/o more benefits. Any internal client like the `thanos-rule-syncer` needs to work through authn/authz. I suggest to do so only if the syncer needs to scope queries per tenant.

Reviewer 4: This means that if you ever change the storage of your rules then you also need to change the rule-sycners to point at new APIs. This is an indication to me that you are too tightly coupling things that should be decoupled.

Author: Good point :raised_hands: Calling the API is a hangover for the original design doc - it doesn't go into details why but I suspect that is so that Observatorium components themselves are designed to work in non-kubernetes environments so we can't just assume that the `syncer` can call `rule-storage-backend` directly.

The API interface will be the same between the API & `rule-storage-backend` so it doesn't matter _too_ much. It is more a question for how this is configured in our reference kubernetes deployment of Observatorium.

I'll add a comment to that effect in the doc :+1:

### More frequent deploys

The above problem has manifested because our deploys are too infrequent for our tenants. Could we not use this as an opportunity to optimize the velocity at which we deploy to production? That way we have the benefit of solving the near-term problems of our tenants, and also rolling things out more frequently.

As it stands, any rollout to production requires coordination and management from a member of the operating team. As the number of tenants and tenants becomes larger, the operating team becomes more of a bottleneck to common tenant operations.

Our goal here is to remove our team entirely from the control loop of updating Prometheus rules. We are trading off immediate term technical complexity against longer-term scalability and happier multi-tenancy operation.

This option also does not address the trust-boundary issue identified above.

### Per-tenant GitOps

Another option would be for each tenant to commit their rule configuration into a git repository they control, and then we synchronise that into the right place in our infrastructure based on a URL they provide. This would eliminate the need for us to manage state on their behalf.

> This is a neat idea that avoids deploy dependencies, but has some drawbacks:

Reviewer 2: Optional: I think in general having to manage additional git repo sounds already like enough of an overhead for the tenants, even without validation / secrets, so I find our actual proposal much more 'tenant-friendly'.

Author: Good point :) Added that in the list

While this may impose some file splitting costs on the user's side, we avoid ambiguity such as valid questions such as:
* Did all of my rules get stored or just some?
* Are my alerting rules being evaluated or just the recording rules?

Finally, warnings are easy to ignore especially if users are using automated process to interact with the API.

#### Storage layer

We will use a persistent storage mechanism that is external to the API deployment (i.e. no local storage). This enables us to satisfy our requirement of horizontally scaling the rule storage backend.

While we have explicitly de-coupled the rule storage backend from the API, we require a concrete implementaion.

We have a number of options for the storage layer backing the rules storage backend service.

##### 1. ETCD

One option would be to use the Kubernetes' control plane as the backing data store for tenant's recording rules.

Pros:
* Lowest possible overhead. No external storage is required to be orchestrated.
* ETCD data model well suited for recording rules i.e. YAML.
* Storage permissions are managed as Kubernetes objects.

> * We could leverage Recording Rules CRDs and get validation for free (?)

Reviewer 5: yes
```suggestion
* We could leverage Recording Rules CRDs and get validation for free
```

Cons:

> * Implicitly ties Observatorium's implementation into a Kubernetes environment. Hard to back out.

Reviewer 5: Really? What if we do this in this addon/plugin format so user can back it up with RBMS if needed?

* Large blast radius. With a large number of tenants and recording rules, we could un-intentionally impact the Kubernetes control plane's performance.

> * ETCD has a limit of 1.5MB per key / value pair so we can't store large files (but Prometheus operator seems to do this ok?).

Reviewer 5: Yea it's fine for those. We can keep this item.

I would add another item: It's might be hard to replicate user configuration across multiple clusters / zones if we would have multi-zone SaaS for single tenant

##### 2. Object Storage

Pros:
* Users of Thanos project are likely to already have object storage configured and ready to use.
* Recording rule data model is a good fit for object storage i.e. YAML.

Cons:
* Unclear consistency semantics depending on object storage provider i.e. in the case of lots of writes, who wins?

> * Requires tenants to manage another set of secret credentials.

Reviewer 5: Really? I though this storage could be behind our API as in this proposal so we would maintain credentials to storage

##### 3. RDBMS

Another option we have considered is to provision and use a relational database i.e. Postgres.

Pros:
* Strong isolation and update semantics.

> * Enables us to use multi-dimensional

Reviewer 5: Enable us to do replication / multi-cluster scalability

Cons:
* We don't currently run RDBMS, and don't have any experience doing so.
* Significant infrastructure overhead - tenants required to BYO database.
* Requires tenants to manage another set of secret credentials.

##### Storage Decision

This was discussed in the [Observatorium Community Meeting](https://docs.google.com/document/d/1jLvOH0Lllt-ShXVgWeeHBGPb3ZuagirabD_hbq41EKs/edit#heading=h.wxenjcrf4iee) on 2021-07-31.

> The consensus among the group was that object storage offered us the best combination of ease of use, familiarity for existing users, and also compatability with the required operations against tenants rules.

Reviewer 5: Nice! I like this idea, BUT I would also consider pros / cons I commented in. I think we missed important part where object storage is hidden by our API so we can change storage later and iterate

Reviewer 5: Actually your diagram has it all, just above items might be not clear about those

> We discussed that we will be likely to employ a RDBMS relatively soon for other features (i.e. RBAC), but we decided to cross that bridge when we came to it.

Reviewer 5: 👍🏽 YAGNI

## Implement API for managing Prometheus Rules

* **Owners:**:
  * `@squat` / `@ianbillett`

* **Related Tickets:**
  * `<JIRA, GH Issues>`

* **Other docs:**
  * `<Links…>`

## TL;DR

> We propose implementing an API that allows multi-tenant users to create, read, update and delete Prometheus alerting and recording rules.

Reviewer 4: I think it's clearer to say that the API is multi-tenant as opposed to the users
```suggestion
We propose implementing a multi-tenant API that allows users to create, read, update and delete Prometheus alerting and recording rules.
```

## Why

The single biggest source of frustration from internal Red Hat users of Observatorium right now is the time it takes for changes to their rules to appear in our production infrastructure.

### Pitfalls of the current solution

#### Implicit deploy cycle dependency

> Currently, the recording rules deployed into Observatorium are configured in the same repository as the configuration for the service itself. This implicitly ties the deploy-cycle of Prometheus rules to the deploy-cycle of Observatorium itself. If a new set of rules needs to be deployed, our team is required to roll-out our production infrastructure.

Reviewer 4: Maybe we should clarify that this is our practice within red hat vs how it is done for "Observatorium". It's a result of the fact that the only entry point into modifying recording rules is the jsonnet code in https://github.com/observatorium/observatorium

Author: good call - updated

As the number of tenants we support and users we serve increases, the team responsible for the Observatorium installation is required to roll out production more frequently in order to satisfy user requests. This becomes an increasing impediment to user experience as the size of Observatorium increases.

#### Shared configuration repositories

> For rules to be rolled out, users need the ability to raise pull requests against the Observatorium repositories that contain our source configuration. This works fine when the two team co-exist within the same organisation, but this becomes a blocking issue when the two teams share a much more restricted (i.e. inter-company) trust boundary.

Reviewer 4: Nits + changing to e.g. since it's one example of such a trust boundary.

```suggestion
For rules to be rolled out, users need the ability to raise pull requests against the Observatorium repositories that contain our source configuration. This works fine when the two teams co-exist within the same organisation, but it becomes a blocking issue when the two teams share a much more restricted (e.g. inter-company) trust boundary.
```

This is not a blocker for Red Hat's internal offering, however this is not inline with Observatorium's stated goal (TODO: insert link) of offering a SaaS-like monitoring solution.

## Goals

* Users can update their Prometheus rules without intervention from the operating team.

## Non-Goals

* Rate-limiting or accounting of user resources.
* Define or implement the underlying database technology.

## How

> We propose to solve the above problem by implementing an API that allows multi-tenant users to create, read, update and delete Prometheus alerting and recording rules.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
We propose to solve the above problem by implementing  amulti-tenant  API that allows users to create, read, update and delete Prometheus alerting and recording rules.
```

> Thanos Ruler operates on the rule configuration provided by users, this is consumed from a file in Ruler's local data directory. Therefore, this configuration that we ingest via the API needs to be replicated into the local data directory of the Thanos Ruler instances. This is achieved with the [thanos-ruler-syncer](https://github.com/observatorium/thanos-rule-syncer), an application that calls the API above and writes the results into a location that Thanos Rule can access.

Reviewer 4: Pedantic nit: not necessarily the data directory, as that is where TSDB data lives, but rather any directory configured using the `--rule-file` flag

Author: I love a pedantic nit :)

> This solution must be backwards compatible with rule configuration currently defined in our repository. That is to say, to ease the transition from our current setup to this new API, Thanos Ruler should be able to operate on Rules both from the API and Supplied as configuration.

Reviewer 4: Backwards compatibility sounds like a red hat problem rather than an Observatorium concern, no?

Author: Backwards compatibility is - but  the real question here is then: should Observatorium support:
* **only** API driven user rules
* **both** API and config-file user rules?

API-only is easier to support, but I would err on the side of supporting both as config-file are what the upstream communities use. WDYT?

Reviewer 4: hm ok so backwards compatibility for the API means not doing anything, right? Because the API is currently totally agnostic to rules. So we are talking about maintaining backwards compatibility in the observatorium jsonnet and how it automatically configures the thanos ruler?
I am not really sure we should be investing effort in maintaining this ad-hoc jsonnet _API_ since it's not formalized or versioned. It was really a hack to have a way of provisioning rules before we had a proper API. The jsonnet interface has been evolving constantly and changes every time we update kube-thanos :p if we want to, we could go the route of ksonnet and version our jsonnet APIs too, but I wouldn't want this to become a bottleneck right now.

I think that if we want to provide a story for administrators to have a read-only, configuration-based approach to managing recording rules for tenants, we should be opinionated and recommend using a rules-file per tenant, e.g. as implemented in the PR, in conjunction with the thanos-rule-syncer. This way the rules are statically provisioned and managed and we can focus on maintaining a single stable API + configuration file syntax.

Author: Ok gotcha, slight misunderstanding there - my intention there was your second point which is a much more eloquent way of putting it.

### How should we persist user's rule configuration?

> In the first iteration of this API, we will persist the rule configuration to a local directory that is backed by a `PersistentVolumeClaim`.

Reviewer 4: I don't think implementing this API by storing request data in files is a viable approach for Observatorium. Right now, the Observatorium API is run as a horizontally scalable service, meaning we can have N replicas all serving requests. If we allow users to write data to disk via the Observatorium API, then suddenly each replica of the service will have a different view of the rules since the data in each Pod's PersistentVolumeClaim will be different. Using files to implement an API backend only works for read-only APIs that can be configured statically during deployment. For writable APIs we really need to store the data in an HA location to which all replicas of the Observatorium API have access, e.g. a database.

Author: Ok - that makes sense. The ability to scale horizontally is then another requirement that we need to explicitly call out :+1:

Author: Resolving - added explicitly as a requirement.
